1. Compare kern/mpentry.S side by side with boot/boot.S. Bearing in mind that 
   kern/mpentry.S is compiled and linked to run above KERNBASE just like 
   everything else in the kernel, what is the purpose of macro MPBOOTPHYS? Why 
   is it necessary in kern/mpentry.S but not in boot/boot.S? In other words, 
   what could go wrong if it were omitted in kern/mpentry.S?
   
   #define MPBOOTPYS(s) ((s) - mpentry_start + MPENTRY_PADDR)
   MPBOOTPHYS is used to calculate the load address of a symbol
 
   In boot.S, load addresses are identical to link addresses; but in mpentry.S
   they are not.


2. It seems that using the big kernel lock guarantees that only one CPU can run
   the kernel code at a time. Why do we still need separate kernel stacks for 
   each CPU? Describe a scenario in which using a shared kernel stack will go 
   wrong, even with the protection of the big kernel lock. 

   Consider the following case:
     Right after an int instruction on CPU 0, another interrupt occures on CPU 1,
     the hardware pushes some states onto the shared kernel stack for CPU 1 before 
     the completion of construction of trap frame of CPU 0, then the shared kernel 
     stack is messed up.    


3. In your implementation of env_run() you should have called lcr3(). Before and
   after the call to lcr3(), your code makes references (at least it should) to the 
   variable e, the argument to env_run. Upon loading the %cr3 register, the addressing 
   context used by the MMU is instantly changed. But a virtual address (namely e) has 
   meaning relative to a given address context--the address context specifies the 
   physical address to which the virtual address maps. Why can the pointer e be 
   dereferenced both before and after the addressing switch?

   virtual addresses in the kernel stack space of current CPU are mapped to same 
   physical address spaces in every environment running on the CPU.
   
4. Whenever the kernel switches from one environment to another, it must ensure the 
   old environment's registers are saved so they can be restored properly later. Why? 
   Where does this happen?

   When the kernel switches from one environment to another it must ensure the old 
   environment's registers are saved so they can be restored later because we will 
   treat this as if it were never interrupted.  

   This happens when we trap from user mode to kernel mode.

Notes on a bug in forktree:
	When using page_walk(pgdir, va, 1) in page_lookup (in kern/pmap.c), we encounter
	a bug when a process forked by another process access _pgfault_handler in the 'call' 
	instruction in pfentry.S
	It becomes right after we change page_walk(pgdir, va, 1) to page_walk(pgdir, va, 0)
	in page_lookup and some related code in region_alloc in kern/env.c

	See commit 4336b8f


   

 

   


